(upbeat music)
If statements are the foundation
of all logic in JavaScript,
they expect Boolean, which is we've learned earlier.
That's a type in JavaScript
that is always either true or false.
Or they expect some sort of condition
that is evaluated to true or false,
or we're gonna learn about these kind of neat concepts
called truthy and falsy.
I gonna explain the mechanics of an if statements
with greater or less than operators right now,
but we're gonna go in deeper into a whole bunch
of different operators in just a second.
So at its most basic, we have an if statement.
It looks like this.
If 10 is greater than two, then go ahead and console log.
Yep, we've looked at a couple of those so far.
So we this is the if statement.
This is what is referred to as the condition.
The condition is going to be evaluated
to either true or false.
And by evaluate I mean
if you were to take that outside of that and just run it,
it's either going to give you true or false.
There is nothing else that could ever be returned from that.
Now that statement can also be truthy or falsy.
We'll talk about that in a second.
Then we have what is called
and you probably know what this is.
Curly brackets are opening and closing a block.
So any code that needs to happen
when this is true will go inside of here.
We can also add an else if.
So you say else if and note that there's a space there.
I know a lot of programming languages do elseif,
or some do both like PHP,
but it's in JavaScript, it's always two words else if.
And then we can have another condition here.
So we'll say 11 is greater than 10,
then we'll go ahead and open up another block
can put whatever you want inside of there as well.
You can also change your else if as long as you wish to go.
So if I did another one else if
and some people like to prefer
to put these on their own lines.
I prefer to put them on the line
with the closing curly bracket of the previous one,
just for readability sake.
That way it keeps it on one line nice and clean.
You can do three is greater than one.
And obviously this will never be reached
cause the first one will be true.
And actually that that is a good point right there.
If the first one is true,
even if ones that come later are also true,
they will never run.
So if you look at this, all of these are going to be true.
They only get Yep.
Like what Yep one. Yep two, and Yep three.
We're only ever going to get Yep one.
Why because as soon as an if statement
finds itself to be true,
it says, I undone here
and it'll go on to only, it will skip the rest
of the if statement,
and will go on to whatever code is underneath it.
If you wish to check for multiple things that are true,
like in this case all three of them are true.
If that was the case,
you'd have to have three separate if statements,
rather than one big else if statement.
And in a lot of cases
where you could either do either one or the other,
I prefer just to do separate if statements,
just for readability sake.
Additionally, if nothing is match,
you can change a dot else on to the end.
So let me get rid of this here.
And let's make a variable called age.
Let's say 50, and we'll say if the age is greater than 70,
and console log in your 70s,
then else if age is greater than 60,
then
and what I like to do here
is just duplicate all these lines
and change out the only parts that you need.
Boom, I got an extra curly bracket there is greater than 50
and your 50s.
And then Finally if nothing is true,
we're going to say else.
And then console log,
nothing was true.
You'll notice that there is no else parenthese here.
That's because in else never has a condition,
and else's just sort of worst case scenario
at the end of the line,
if nothing was true.
Then run me similar to the default
that we learned about in our switch statement.
And now you'll see nothing is true,
it will finally run over to this.
Now if I take a look at this example here,
and if I make it 100 just like we've said,
what are we going to get?
We get you're in your 70s.
That may kind of make sense,
but even though these are also true,
like I said before, the first thing that is true,
is the one that is going to trip.
So if you are doing multiple things that could be true,
then you need to be aware of the order in which you check
for your if statements.
Now let's talk about if statements inside of functions,
cause it's likely that we're going to use
an if statement inside of a function
to return different values.
So let's create a little function called slugify.
It's gonna paste in this slugify function that we have here.
Let's go through what it does real quick.
You can go ahead and type this up
or grab it from the answer.
We've got our function slugify, it takes in a sentence
and then it's going to take in a Boolean
which is either gonna be true or false
of whether we should lowercase it or not.
Then what we do is we return that sentence,
but we call the dot replace method on it.
Now this, what is this?
This is what is referred to as a Regex a regular expression.
A regular expression is a way to match characters
in some text
and the
this regex what it will do a regex is always starts
and closes with a forward slash.
And then you can type in different characters in here.
In our case we wanna pass the space character
which is forward slash s, and then the g means global.
That means find them all, not just the first one.
And then we replace it with the dash
and we run to lowercase.
Now if I run that,
you see that it just slugfies it.
It put some dashes where spaces where.
Now if we were to run that with a second argument,
which is true,
then it will lowercase that as well.
Now, some developers, myself included,
prefer to keep as much logic out of these brackets
as possible, because I inevitably delete one by accident,
and then my whole day is ruined when you try to run it.
So what you can do
is you can just get rid of this house here
and run the code like that.
Now is that going to be the same thing?
It is!
And the reason that it's the same thing is that
is because of this return keyword here.
Now, what does return mean?
Well, return means to return a value from a function
and stop that function from running.
Because whenever you return from a function,
even if it's inside of an if statement,
that function will stop running
and this code will never be reachable.
So rather than having an if else,
you can simply just have an if,
and then the else is sort of assumed
by you putting it down here.
That's personal preference.
There's no sort of best way to do it.
I just prefer to have an if statement, and then my else,
maybe just put at a little comment there
else and you can put all of the code
that is in the house right down there.
Now, we could have also done something like this.
There's so many different ways
we could have coded this function.
We could have say
let the slug is equal to and we take the sentence
and replace it
here
and then we could have said,
if it's lowercase, slug is equal to slug dot to lower case,
and then at the end of the function,
simply just return slug.
Right now exact Same way to do it.
And then if this is the case, we create a variable.
If it is lowercase, we update that variable,
and then we return it.
Could have also done this as well,
where we just return,
slug dot to lowercase.
And this case, I kinda like that
because if that regex is complicated,
then you have to update it in two spots.
This is nicer where you can just create the slug,
and then if you are lower casing it,
then you return it with the lowercase value on it.
Otherwise just return the regular slug.
So, many different ways to go about this type of thing.
The important part is that,
when you have an inside of a function,
you can always return from that if,
and that will stop that function from running
and it will actually return the value to the function.
Now let's talk about operators.
We've talked briefly about the different equals science.
So we've got equals triple equals and double equals.
So we have is age variable,
and if we were to check if that is equal to 100,
that will actually error out
because the single equal will set the value into a variable,
and this is a constant variable which you can't do.
Now if I took a double equals,
we get true.
And we learned earlier,
that's because double equals will check that the values
are the same.
So the value of age is 100,
and the value of what we're comparing it against,
it's also 100.
The sort of gotcha there
is if we compare it against another value,
which is something like double equals a string of 100.
Those are technically the same thing,
but they are not the same type.
So using triple equals,
will check if the type of age
and the type of 100
are the same.
I guess I had to put around that (murmur).
So that's a string.
So because of that,
we recommend that you almost always use triple equals.
And I told you that I would be
telling you why
there is double equals in the language.
And that is because of null and undefined.
So sometimes if you have null,
and you wanna check if it's equal to undefined,
that's going to be false.
Wherever a double equals,
those two things are going to be the same.
Now, that's sort of why we have it,
although honestly I can't remember the last time
that I've done that in my career
where I've had to reach for double equals,
because of what we're going to learn in just a second,
which is truthy or falsy.
Now you also have does not equal with bang.
And the bang is the exclamation mark.
So if I say const name is equal to wes,
we say name is equal to wes.
Obviously that's true.
But if I say name is equal to Keith,
that is going to be false.
And now in our case, you can take out one of the equals
and put a bang, an exclamation mark.
Bang is what we call it as programmers.
So name does not equal Keith, and that will be true.
So you can either do it that
with a double equals and one bang,
so that is the best practice,
but it will also work with
10 does not equal 10.
That is true,
but then if I make that a single one little be false.
Why because these things technically are the same
when you're using double equals.
So, that bang in there,
it will check for not equal to.
Of course we have greater than or less than.
So if you are checking like 10 is greater than 10,
10 is greater or equal to 10.
Sometimes people think like okay,
so all the other ones are three characters
like triple equals and bang double equals.
So like wouldn't have to do that.
No, that doesn't work.
Why? Because these greater than less than
and equal to operators only ever deal with numbers.
So if you by chance use a string in there,
it will, what it will do is it will turn the string
into a number at first,
but you shouldn't really be doing that.
You should always make sure
that you've got apples and apples.
You got numbers before you're doing
any sort of type of this thing.
So if I a greater or equal to,
I always tell people think of the hungry alligator.
That's the way I can remember it.
Is the hungry alligator.
See his little mouth?
Is he pointed to the largest number? Then Yes,
that is true.
But if the hungry alligator is mixed up
and he's pointed towards the wrong number,
the smaller number then is going to be false
and that the alligator is no good. (laughs)
Additionally, we have and or, or.
This is something that I do quite a bit.
Let's move back to this HTML here,
so we can sort of see how this all works.
So say const name is equal to wes.
And we want to say if name is equal to wes,
then we say console log, cool name.
Now if I want to code a function
that checked if someone's name was also Scott,
and that also is a cool name,
then I could use the or
in my if statement.
So or looks like this pipe pipe,
and then we say name is equal to Scott.
So a couple things there.
This reads as if the name is equal to Wes,
or the name is equal to Scott then we console a cool name.
And it says cool name, if I change this just to Scott,
it will still say cool name.
Don't worry about the capitalization now,
we'll run into how to say that.
Now if I put a capital S on there, it doesn't work.
Don't worry about that for now.
The other thing wanna know is the last names of console.
Last is equal to bos.
If you want to check if the first name is Wes,
and the last name is equal to bos,
then we don't say or, we say and.
And that's what to ampersands.
So and and.
If the name is equal to wes,
and the last name is equal to bos,
it's not going to run because it's still Scott.
Change that to wes, and it will go ahead and run.
Now another thing about this is that,
we can use (murmur) pretty heavily here.
So we can say if the name is equal to Scott,
or the name is equal to wes
and the last is equal to bos, then cool name.
So if your name is Scott, then you're cool,
but if your name is wes and bos,
then your name is also cool.
So what will this do is,
it will check the parentheses
and this thing needs to be true,
in order for the whole thing to be true.
And you can see that here where
if we go in here we say
10 is equal to 10.
That's true.
And 10,
five is equal to five,
that will obviously give us true.
But if one of these is wrong, like three,
it will give us false.
Meaning I always like to think of this
as like poison the well meaning that,
even if everything else was true,
if one of them is false,
then the entire thing will evaluate out to be false.
So that can also be like true and true.
Then we could go forever with this and true and true.
And then as soon as you put that will always equal true.
But if you have one false along the way,
that will poison the well.
Whereas if you had Ors there,
that will always be true
because as long as one of them is going to be equal to true.
Next up we have using functions with if statements.
So, it's pretty common to do something like
if we have a string here,
let's
say wes.
We have a string like awesome,
and we can use that includes,
which is a method on strings.
And we want to say if that includes wes
then it will return true.
If it includes Scott is going to be false.
So includes is a method that will return true or false.
And we can use those directly inside of our if statements.
So we say if awesome
includes the name,
then console log,
super cool awesome name.
Can see super cool awesome name.
Pretty often you have methods that return true or false,
and you can use those directly inside.
You can also sometimes people like to put them
in its own variables, so it makes it easier to read.
So instead of doing that we just make a const is
awesome name and we store the value in a variable,
and then we can say if is awesome name, then go ahead.
So this variable will store a Boolean.
Look at that you have over top on it
it tells you it's a Boolean,
and then we can go ahead and use that.
So readability with multiple and's and or's or if statements
is sometimes gets a little hairy.
So if that's the case,
break it up into separate variables
and then put them into your if statement
because it makes it a lot easier to go ahead and do.
Similarly, we can make our own functions
that return true or false.
So we could just make a function called name is awesome
and that will take in someone's name.
And then from that we can take awesome dot includes
their name.
Then we can simply return the value there.
Now I've got this name is awesome function
that takes in wes and that will return true.
Scott returns false.
You can go ahead and use that in your if statement.
So if name is awesome, Wes,
can console log, cool name Wes.
You see a cool name has pop up there.
Next up, we have this concept of truthy and falsy.
And I haven't been entirely truthy to you,
which is I used to have a mentor of one of my classes named
Truthy and she always we call the truthy the truthy (laughs)
because she always did a good job
at explaining truthy and falsy.
I haven't been entirely truthful in this if statement
is requiring a Boolean cause right here,
that's if statement, that's an if statement.
But because in essence, we will also take values
that are truthy and falsy.
Meaning that if we say const dog
is equal to snickers.
And if we say if dog console log your,
dot you have a dog
and that else you
don't have a dog.
Now if I refresh this, you have a dog.
If I leave Snickers, empty, what's what's going to happen?
You don't have a dog.
Okay? So an empty string is not true
and it's not false.
It's an empty string.
So how come this works?
Well, that's because if statements will take in
a number of different values,
and it will try to coerce them,
that's a word we'll learn about in a second,
it will try to turn them into a Boolean of true or false.
So values that are truthy and falsy will also work.
So what are the truthy and falsy?
So I have a list here.
I'm going to sort them into truthy and falsy.
Let's go up to the body here
and we'll make a h2
truthy values,
and then we'll do falsy values.
And let's just paste the list above it.
Okay, so zero is going to be a falsiy value.
Meaning that when it's run,
a zero will equate to false.
And I can show you real quick example if we go down here,
and we'll say const score is equal to zero.
So if score, log,
there is a score already,
and then else, console log no score yet.
So a score of zero is no score yet.
Why? Because zero equates to false
or it is a falsy value.
One is going to be a truthy value, right?
Because if I change this thing here to one,
there is a score already.
Now what about negative 10?
It's negative.
Is it going to be false or true?
Let's do it.
Let's put its science in place.
A negative 10, place your bets.
Boom, truthy.
So simply zero is falsy,
all other numbers are going to be truthy.
So let's go back
truthy value undefined.
So if, how do you make an undefined variable? Just do that.
We missed our declaration.
You can only make a let be undefined.
So is, if I make undefined variable,
it says no score yet.
So if I go to score, it is undefined.
That means that undefined is a falsy value.
Put it in this list right here.
Next we have a variable set at null.
Null is also a false a value.
I'm not gonna make you do it again.(laughs)
So if you have a variable that is null,
it is the same thing as false,
a variable set to hello minus 10,
which is Nan.
So if we take Hello,
we subtract 10 from it,
we get Nan, which is not a number.
And so is is not a number truthy and falsy.
Let's try it.
The score is equal to
Wes times 100.
That's gonna be Nan. Let's check it.
Score is Nan it says no score yet.
Meaning that Nan is all see an empty string its falsy.
We already learned that.
A full string is truthy.
So any string with content and it will be true.
A string of zero.
So what do you think? Is it what is going to be?
It's a string, and it has content.
So that's true, but we also learned that zero is false.
Already is a score.
So, a string of zero a string of anything,
even a string of space is going to be truthy.
The only thing about a string that is falsy,
is a string of nothing.
So we will put that one under truthy.
Now here is to we really haven't touched on a whole yet.
An empty array and an empty object.
So an array can be shown like this,
with a set of square brackets.
Usually an array of like 1-3-7-8,
and you (murmur) store a list of things in.
We've seen a race before we're going to go into them next.
But if I have an empty array,
well let's look at an array with values in.
It says there is a score so that's truthy.
But if we have an array of nothing,
it says there's a score ready.
So an array that has nothing in it is truthy,
if you ever need to check for anything in an array,
we would look for something called the length.
We're getting a bit ahead of ourselves,
but the length is how you tell how many items
are in an array.
If that's the case, the length will return zero.
So 5 an array 1-2-3,
and the call length on it.
It will give us three.
You have an empty array, with length, it will give us zero.
So that would be true,
that will be false.
Truthy and falsy bring that back.
The Last one that we have is a empty object,
which is curly brackets.
And that works exactly the same,
where you simply an empty object still is truthy,
because it is there.
If you do want to check if there is anything in that object,
you can use something called object dot keys.
So object dot keys
with an empty object
or turned to an empty array,
and then you can just say length on that, and that's zero.
Whereas if we have something like names equal to Wes,
that will give us, object dot keys
will give us all of the properties on it.
And then since it's an array,
we can check for the length on that array.
That's a good way to get true truth the falsy values,
out of an object.
So truthy and falsy.
We use it a whole bunch in JavaScript.
I use that all the time
and that's why you often see if statements with things
that you might not think are true or false.
And that's simply because we're checking for its existence
or checking if it's there or not.
Passing, you can quit this video now
if you're if you understand it.
But what I wanna do
is make an array of all of these different types
and loop over it
and just show you with an if statement
that they are truthy and falsy.
So let's, I'm gonna grab all of these
and all of these,
and
all of these,
and all the way down here.
And we haven't hit arrays yet,
but array is a list of things,
and what we can do is, say,
const values is equal to an empty array,
and then I'm just gonna kinda
go through all of these right now.
So first item is empty array,
a second item is an empty object,
third item is negative 10,
fourth item is one then we have zero,
a empty string,
a full string,
I think we also mentioned a string with a space in it,
undefined, Nan, not, that's case sensitive, not a number.
Null,
and I believe that is it.
So then we'll just take the values
and we'll call for each much like we did with the DOM notes.
And we'll say for each value,
and just console log the value.
So you got here, let's actually console group,
truthy or falsy values
group and
here we go.
And then for each one will say,
if value, then console log,
the value
is truthy.
Else
the value is falsy.
So there we go truthy, truthy, truthy, truthy, falsy.
(laughs)
Doesn't really show us what it is,
but obviously is a an empty string, full string
is space, is truthy.
Undefined as falsy, Nan is fally, null is falsy.
So maybe I don't know maybe get a tattoo of that
on your chest or print it out put upside your computer.
It is kinda of just a nice little look at all their values.
Then the kind of thing about that
is you can add you can add anything you want.
Like is a, an emoji of zero truthy a falsy?
truthy
(laughs) is a actually the only emoji that is falsy,
is the poop emoji.
I'm joking and just joking.
They're all truthy.
They're all texts.
They're all something so they are truthy.
So next video we're going to get into coersion
and ternaries.
See you then.